Glucose is a form of sugar,
formed from the breakdown of foods we eat,
especially carbohydrates.
Whenever you eat, the level of glucose
in your blood rises.
People with diabetes have
too much glucose—sugar—in their blood.
This occurs because of problems
with a hormone called insulin.
Insulin allows glucose to move from the
bloodstream into cells for use as fuel.
Insulin is produced by cells in your pancreas.
This gland, which is located in your abdomen,
has patches of tissue called islets of Langerhans.
The majority of islet cells are beta cells,
which normally produce, store, and release
small granules of insulin into your bloodstream.
The insulin binds to receptors on the membrane
of most of the cells in your body.
This activates protein molecules on the membrane
that allow the glucose to enter the cell.
Normally, the beta cells release
small amounts of insulin continuously
and also release insulin in surges
when blood glucose levels increase.
In people with type 1 diabetes,
no insulin is produced in response
to blood glucose levels.
People with type 2 diabetes
produce insulin
but their bodies don’t use it properly.
High blood sugar—called hyperglycemia,
for an extended period of time
can damage the kidneys, nerves, heart, and eyes.
Very high blood sugar is a medical emergency.